---
number: 125
title: Valid Palindrome
bigo: O(n)
runtime: 88ms (87.61 percentile)
memory: 38.4mb (83.52 percentile)
---

# Valid Palindrome

## Problem

Given a string, determine if it is a palindrome, considering only alphanumeric characters and ignoring cases.

**Note:** For the purpose of this problem, we define empty string as valid palindrome.

**Example 1:**

```
Input: "A man, a plan, a canal: Panama"
Output: true
```

**Example 2:**

```
Input: "race a car"
Output: false
```

**Constraints:**

- `s` consists only of printable ASCII characters.

## Approach

**So what's a palindrome?** A string is considered a palindrome if it's the same forwards as it is backwards. My first instinct is to reverse the string and see if it matches the original:

```jsx
const isPalindrome = str => str === str.split().reverse().join('')
```

Strings in JS do not have a built in reverse function so you have to reverse it by turning it into an array of characters, reversing that, and joining it together again.

A couple problems:

1. This assumes that the string that is given consists of *only* alphanumeric characters. This is not the case for either of the examples, so our algorithm would fail for either of those cases.
2. `split`, `reverse`, and `join` are three $O(n)$ iterations. Can we speed this up somehow?

### Improvement #1

Before worrying about performance, let's focus on getting the algorithm correct first. To fix the algorithm for inputs like the examples, my first intuition is to filter out all the characters that is not alphanumeric.

The simplest way to do this is using a regex:

```jsx
const removeAlphanumeric = str => str.replace(/[^0-9a-z]/gi, '')
```

Then doing the same test as before, giving us our first solution:

```jsx
/**
 * @param {string} s
 * @return {boolean}
 */
const isPalindrome = function(s) {
    const stripped = removeAlphanumeric(s)
    return stripped === reverse(stripped)
};

function removeAlphanumeric(str) {
    return str.replace(/[^0-9a-z]/gi, '')
}

function reverse(str) {
    return str.split().reverse().join('')
}
```

Strangely enough this was failing given "race a car". My first instinct is the regex wasn't taking out whitespace, but it did.

It turns out the problem was `split()` wasn't correctly splitting the string into an array of characters. Adding the empty string `''` as a parameter to split solved the problem, but after some searching it turned out to not be [unicode safe](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4547609/how-do-you-get-a-string-to-a-character-array-in-javascript/34717402#34717402). 

No problem, we can use the spread syntax instead:

```jsx
function reverse(str) {
    return [...str].reverse().join('')
}
```

Again, this didn't pass the tests. Specifically it wasn't working for strings with different cases in them, such as `"A man, a plan, a canal: Panama"`.

No worries, let's make sure we convert the strings to lower case before we compare them:

```jsx
const isPalindrome = function(s) {
    const stripped = removeAlphanumeric(s)
    return stripped.toLowerCase() === reverse(stripped).toLowerCase()
};
```

Success! The complete code for the first solution:

```jsx
/**
 * @param {string} s
 * @return {boolean}
 */
const isPalindrome = function(s) {
    const stripped = removeAlphanumeric(s)
    return stripped.toLowerCase() === reverse(stripped).toLowerCase()
};

function removeAlphanumeric(str) {
    return str.replace(/[^0-9a-z]/gi, '')
}

function reverse(str) {
    return [...str].reverse().join('')
}
```

This first attempt:

- Beats **69.13%** of JS submissions
- Has a runtime of **88 ms**
- Uses **40.9 MB** of memory

### Improvement #2

We can improve this further. Let's look at some of the bottlenecks.

The reverse function is three consecutive $O(n)$ operations. This seems a little unnecessary to me. Is there a way to speed this up or **is this function even necessary?**

A string is equal to its reverse if the first character is equal to the last character, the second character is equal to the second-to-last character, and so on. This insight leads to the optimal solution — "walk" the string simultaneously from the first character and the last character. If the characters always match up, then it's a palindrome. If any one character doesn't match up, then it's not.

To do this, we maintain two pointers: a `head` and a `tail`. The `head` pointer starts at the first character while the `tail` pointer starts at the last. We then compare each character at the pointer(s) location and update the pointers respectively:

```jsx
/**
 * @param {string} s
 * @return {boolean}
 */
const isPalindrome = function(s) {
    const stripped = removeAlphanumeric(s).toLowerCase()
    
    let head = 0
    let tail = stripped.length - 1
    while (head < tail) {
        if (stripped[head] !== stripped[tail]) {
            return false
        }
        head++
        tail--
    }
    return true
};

function removeAlphanumeric(str) {
    return str.replace(/[^0-9a-z]/gi, '')
}
```

This final solution:

- Beats **91.71%** of JS submissions
- Has a runtime of **80 ms**
- Uses **38.7 MB** of memory

This solution also has the advantage of "exiting early" — as soon as we encounter a character that doesn't match, we immediately return. In the previous solution, we do the work of reversing the entire string even if a part of it doesn't match up.

### Notes

- While our percentile jumped up by over 30%, our runtime went down by only 8ms. In some ways this is a "micro-optimization" so if this problem was encountered in a real world setting, the first solution (in most cases) would have worked just fine.
- The time complexity was $O(n)$ before and $O(n)$ after, so again this optimization may not be necessary at the end of the day.